hello and welcome to the kubernetes
crash course where i will teach you
everything you need to know to get
started with kubernetes in one hour
i am nana and i have taught hundreds of
thousands of people how to advance their
devops skills through my youtube channel
online courses and the devops
educational program
if you're new here be sure to subscribe
because i upload new videos all the time
now let's look at an overview of what
you will learn
first of all we'll see what is
kubernetes and why do we need it and why
did it become so popular
second we will go through the kubernetes
architecture and you will see how
kubernetes actually works in the
background
after that we will cover main kubernetes
components that you need to learn to
work efficiently with kubernetes and
finally we will do a hands-on demo
project to get your first practical
experience with kubernetes now
kubernetes is a very popular but also a
very complex technology so this crash
course will help you get your first
experience to get started with
kubernetes but if by the end of the
video you decide to deepen your
knowledge in kubernetes and are thinking
about a career as a kubernetes
administrator my new complete kubernetes
administrator course will be a great
resource for you where you will learn
how to build configure and manage
kubernetes clusters from scratch
the course is also dedicated to help you
pass the cka exam from linux foundation
to become a certified kubernetes
administrator now we have a lot to cover
in this video so let's jump right into
it
so let's jump in right into the
definition what is kubernetes
so kubernetes is an open source
container orchestration framework which
was originally developed by google so on
the foundation it manages containers be
docker containers or from some other
technology which basically means that
kubernetes helps you manage applications
that are made up of hundreds or maybe
thousands of containers and it helps you
manage them in different environments
like physical machines virtual machines
or cloud environments or even hybrid
deployment environments
so what problems does kubernetes solve
and what are the tasks of a container
orchestration tool actually so to go
through this chronologically
the rise of microservices caused
increased usage of container
technologies because the containers
actually offer the perfect host for
small
independent applications like
microservices
and the rise of containers and the micro
service technology actually resulted in
applications they're now comprised of
hundreds or sometimes maybe even
thousands of containers managing those
loads of containers across multiple
environments using scripts and self-made
tools can be really complex
and sometimes even impossible so that
specific scenario actually caused the
need for
having container orchestration
technologies
so what those orchestration tools like
kubernetes do is
actually guarantee following features
one is high availability in simple words
high availability means that the
application has no downtime so it's
always accessible by the users a second
one is scalability which means you can
scale your applications fast when you
have more load on it and more users are
trying to access it and the same way you
can easily scale it down when the load
goes down
so it makes your application more
flexible to adjust to the increasing or
decreasing load and the third one is
disaster recovery which basically means
that if an infrastructure has some
problems like data is lost or the
servers explode or something bad happens
with the service center the
infrastructure has to have some kind of
mechanism to back up the data and to
restore it to the latest state so that
application doesn't actually lose any
data and the containerized application
can run from the latest state after the
recovery
and all of these are functionalities
that
container orchestration technologies
like kubernetes offer so how does the
kubernetes basic architecture actually
look like
the kubernetes cluster is made up with
at least one master node
and then connected to it you have
a couple of worker nodes where each node
has a cubelet process running on it and
cubelet is actually a kubernetes process
that makes it possible for the cluster
to talk to each other to communicate to
each other and actually execute some
tasks on those nodes like running
application processes
each worker node has containers of
different applications deployed on it so
depending on how the workload is
distributed you would have different
number of docker containers running on
worker nodes and worker nodes are where
the actual work is happening so here is
where your applications are running so
the question is what is running on
masternode
masternode actually runs several
kubernetes processes that are absolutely
necessary
to run and manage the cluster properly
one of such processes is an api server
which also is a container an api server
is actually the entry point to the
kubernetes cluster so this is the
process
which the different kubernetes clients
will talk to like ui if you're using
kubernetes dashboard an api if you're
using some scripts and automating
technologies and a command line tool so
all of these will talk to the api server
another process that is running on
master node is a controller manager
which basically keeps an overview of
what's happening in the cluster whether
something needs to be repaired or maybe
if a container died and it needs to be
restarted etc
and another one is
scheduler which is basically responsible
for scheduling
containers on different nodes based on
the workload and the available server
resources on each node so it's an
intelligent
process that decides on which worker
node the next container should be
scheduled on based on the available
resources on those worker nodes and the
load that that container needs and
another very important component of the
whole cluster is actually an etcd key
value storage which basically holds at
any time the current state of the
kubernetes cluster so it has all the
configuration data inside
and all the status data of each node and
each container inside of that node and
the backup and restore that we mentioned
previously is actually made from these
etcd snapshots because you can recover
the whole cluster state using that etcd
snapshot and last but not least also a
very important component of kubernetes
which enables those nodes worker nodes
masternodes talk to each other is the
virtual network that spans all the nodes
that are part of the cluster and in
simple words virtual network actually
turns
all the nodes inside of a cluster into
one powerful machine that has the sum of
all the resources of individual nodes
one thing to be noted here is that
worker knows because they actually have
most load because they are running the
applications on inside of it usually are
much bigger and have more resources
because they will be running hundreds of
containers inside of them whereas master
node will be running just a handful of
master processes like we see in this
diagram so it doesn't need that many
resources however as you can imagine
masternode is much more important than
the individual worker nodes because if
for example you lose a masternode access
you will not be able to access the
cluster anymore and that means that you
absolutely have to have a backup of your
master at any time so in production
environments usually you would have at
least two masters inside of your
kubernetes cluster but in more cases of
course you're going to have multiple
musters where if one muster node
is down the cluster continues to
function smoothly because you have other
masters available
in this video we're going to learn about
the main kubernetes components that we
as kubernetes administrators or users
will be working with most of the time to
make it easier to understand all these
components i'm gonna build a simple use
case of a web application with a simple
database and i'm gonna show you step by
step how each component in kubernetes
helps you deploy such an application
setup and what is the role of each of
these components
so let's start with the basic setup of a
worker node or in kubernetes terms a
node
which is a simple server a physical or
virtual machine and the basic component
or the smallest unit of kubernetes is a
pod so what pod is is basically an
abstraction over a container so if
you're familiar with docker containers
or container images so basically what
pod does is it creates this running
environment or a layer on top of the
container
and the reason is because kubernetes
wants to abstract away the container
runtime or container technologies so
that you can replace them if you want to
and also because you don't have to
directly work with docker or whatever
container technology you use in a
kubernetes so you only interact with the
kubernetes layer so we have an
application pod which is our own
application and that will maybe use a
database pod with its own container and
this is also an important concept here
pod is usually meant to run one
application container inside of it you
can run multiple containers inside one
pod but usually it's only the case if
you have one main application container
and the helper container or some side
service that has to run inside of that
pod
and as you see this is nothing special
you just have one server and two
containers running on it with a
abstraction layer on top of it so now
let's see how they communicate with each
other in kubernetes world so kubernetes
offers out of the box a virtual network
which means that each
pod gets its own ip address not the
container the pod gets the ip address
and each pod
can communicate with each other using
that ip address which is an internal ip
address obviously it's not the public
one so my application container can
communicate with database using the ip
address however pod components in
kubernetes also an important concept are
ephemeral which means that they can die
very easily
and when that happens for example if i
lose a database container because the
container crashed because the
application crashed inside or because
the nodes the server that i'm running
them on
ran out resources the pod will die
and a new one will get created in its
place and when that happens it will get
assigned a new ip address which
obviously is inconvenient if you are
communicating with the database using
the ip address because now you have to
adjust it every time pod restarts and
because of that another component of
kubernetes called service is used
so service is basically a static ip
address or permanent ip address that can
be attached so to say to each pod so my
app will have its own service and
database pod will have its own service
and the good thing here is that the life
cycles of service and the pod are not
connected so even if the pod dies
the service and its ip address will stay
so you don't have to change that
endpoint anymore
so now obviously you would want your
application to be accessible through a
browser right and for this you would
have to create an external service so
external services a service that opens
the communication from external sources
but obviously you wouldn't want your
database to be open to the public
requests and for that you would create
something called an internal service so
this is a type of a service that you
specify when creating one however if you
notice the url of
the external service is not very
practical so basically what you have is
an http protocol with a node ip address
so of the node not the service and the
port number of the service which is
good for test purposes if you want to
test something very fast but not for the
end product so usually you would want
your url to look like this if you want
to talk to your application with a
secure protocol and a domain name and
for that
there is another component of kubernetes
called ingress so instead of service the
request goes first to ingress and it
does the forwarding then to the service
so now we saw some of the very basic
components of kubernetes and as you see
this is a very simple setup we just have
a one server and a couple of containers
running and some services nothing really
special where kubernetes advantages or
the actual cool features really come
forward but we're gonna get there step
by step so let's continue
so as we said pods communicate with each
other using a service so my application
will have a database endpoint let's say
called mongodb service that it uses to
communicate with the database but
whether you configure usually this
database url or endpoint usually you
would do it in application properties
file or as some kind of external
environmental variable but usually it's
inside of the built image of the
application so for example if the
endpoint of the service or service name
in this case changed to mongodb you
would have to adjust that url in the
application so usually you'd have to
rebuild the application with a new
version and you have to push it to the
repository and now you'll have to
pull that new image in your pod and
restart the whole thing so a little bit
tedious for a small change like database
url so for that purpose kubernetes has a
component called config map so what it
does is it's basically your external
configuration to your application so
config map would usually contain
configuration data like urls of a
database or some other services that you
use and in kubernetes you just connect
it to the pod so that pod actually gets
the data that config map contains
and now if you change the name of the
service the endpoint of the service you
just adjust the config map and that's it
you don't have to build a new image and
have to go through this whole cycle now
part of the external configuration can
also be database username and password
right which may also change in the
application deployment process but
putting a password or other credentials
in a config map in a plain text format
would be insecure even though it's an
external configuration so for this
purpose kubernetes has another component
called secret
so secret is just like config map but
the difference is that it's used to
store secret data credentials for
example and it's stored not in a plain
text format but in base 64 in encoded
format but of course basics before
encoding a secret doesn't make it
automatically secure
the secret components are meant to be
encrypted
using third-party tools in kubernetes
because kubernetes doesn't encrypt them
out of the box
and there are tools for that from cloud
providers or separate third-party tools
that you can
deploy on kubernetes to encrypt your
secrets and that will make secrets
secure
so secret would contain things like
credentials and of course i mean
database user you could also put in
config map but what's important is the
passwords certificates things that you
don't want other people to have access
to would go in the secret and just like
config map you just connect it to your
pod so that pod can actually see those
data and read from the secret you can
actually use the data from configmap or
secret inside of your application pod
using for example environmental
variables or even as a properties file
so now let's see another very important
concept generally which is data storage
and how it works in kubernetes
so we have this database pod that our
application uses and it has some data or
it generates some data with this setup
that you see now if the database
container or the pod gets restarted
the data would be gone and that's
problematic and inconvenient obviously
because you want your database data or
log data to be persisted reliably long
term
and the way you can do it in kubernetes
is using another component of kubernetes
called volumes
and how it works is that it basically
attaches a physical storage on a hard
drive to your pod and that storage could
be either on a local machine meaning on
the same server node where the pod is
running or it could be on a remote
storage meaning outside of the
kubernetes cluster it could be a cloud
storage or it could be your own premise
storage which is not part of the
kubernetes cluster so you just have an
external reference on it so now when the
database pod or container gets restarted
all the data will be there persisted
it's important to understand the
distinction between the kubernetes
cluster and all of its components and
the storage
regardless of whether it's a local or
remote storage think of a storage as an
external hard drive plugged in into the
kubernetes cluster because the point is
kubernetes cluster explicitly doesn't
manage any data persistence which means
that you as a kubernetes user or an
administrator are responsible for
backing up the data replicating and
managing it and making sure that it's
kept on a proper hardware etc because
it's not taking care of kubernetes
so now let's see everything is running
perfectly and a user can access our
application through a browser
now with this setup what happens if my
application pod dies right crashes or i
have to restart the pod because i built
a new container image
basically i would have a downtime where
a user can reach my application which is
obviously a very bad thing
if it happens in production and this is
exactly the advantage of distributed
systems and containers
so instead of relying on just one
application part and one database part
etc
we are replicating everything
on multiple servers
so we would have another node where a
replica or clone of our application
would run which will also be connected
to the service so remember previously we
said the service is like a persistent
static ip address with a dns name so
that you don't have to
constantly adjust the end point when a
pod dies
but service is also a load balancer
which means that the service will
actually catch the request and forward
it to whichever part is least busy so it
has both of these functionalities
but in order to create the the second
replica of the my application pod you
wouldn't create a second part but
instead you will define a blueprint for
a my application pod and specify how
many replicas of that pod you would like
to run and that component or that
blueprint is called deployment which is
another component of kubernetes and in
practice you would not be working with
pods or you would not be creating pods
you would be creating deployments
because there you can specify how many
replicas and you can also scale up or
scale down the number of replicas of
pots that you need so with pot we said
that pot is a layer of abstraction on
top of containers
and deployment is another abstraction on
top of pots which makes it more
convenient to interact with the pods
replicate them and do some other
configuration
so in practice you would mostly work
with deployments and not with pods so
now if one of the replicas of your
application pod would die the service
will forward the requests to another one
so your application would still be
accessible for the user so now you're
probably wondering what about the
database pod because if the database
part died your application also wouldn't
be accessible so we need a
database replica as well however we
can't replicate database using a
deployment and the reason for that is
because database has a state which is
its data
meaning that if we have clones or
replicas of the database they would all
need to access the same
shared
data storage and there you would need
some kind of mechanism that manages
which parts are currently writing to
that storage or which pods are reading
from the storage in order to avoid data
inconsistencies and that mechanism
in addition to replicating feature is
offered by another kubernetes component
called statefulset so this component is
meant specifically for applications like
databases so mysql mongodb
elasticsearch or any other stateful
applications or databases
should be created using stateful sets
and not deployments
it's a very important distinction
and stateful said just like deployment
would take care of
replicating the pots and scaling them up
or scaling them down but making sure the
database reads and writes are
synchronized so that no database
inconsistencies are offered however i
must mention here that deploying
database applications using stateful
sets
in kubernetes cluster can be somewhat
tedious so it's definitely more
difficult than working with deployments
where you don't have all these
challenges that's why it's also a common
practice to host database
applications outside of the kubernetes
cluster and just have the deployments or
stateless applications
that replicate and scale with no problem
inside of the kubernetes cluster and
communicate with the external database
so now that we have two replicas of my
application pod and two replicas of the
database and they're both load balanced
our setup is more robust which means
that now even if node one the whole node
server was actually rebooted or crashed
and nothing could run on it we would
still have a second node with
application and database pods running on
it and the application would still be
accessible by the user until these two
replicas get recreated so you can avoid
downtime
so to summarize we have looked at
the most used kubernetes components we
start with the pods and the services in
order to communicate between the parts
and the ingress component which is
used to route traffic into the cluster
we've also looked at external
configuration using config maps and
secrets and data persistence using
volumes and finally we've looked at pod
blueprints with replicating mechanisms
like deployments and stateful sets where
stateful set is used specifically for
stateful applications like databases
just using these core components you can
actually build pretty powerful
kubernetes clusters
before moving on i want to give a shout
out to castin who made this video
possible
kessen's k10 is the data management
platform for kubernetes
k10 basically takes off most of the load
of doing backup and restore in
kubernetes from the cluster
administrators it has a very simple ui
so it's super easy to work with and has
an intelligent logic which does all the
heavy lifting for you and with my link
you can download k10 for free and get 10
nodes free forever to do your kubernetes
backups so make sure to check out the
link in the video description and now
let's continue
so now that we have seen the basic
concepts of kubernetes how do we
actually create those components like
pods and services to configure the
kubernetes cluster
all the configuration in kubernetes
cluster actually goes through a master
node with the process called api server
which we mentioned briefly earlier so
kubernetes clients which could be a ui a
kubernetes dashboard for example or an
api which could be a script or a curl
command
or a command line tool like cubectl they
all talk to the api server and they send
their configuration requests to the api
server which is the main entry point or
the only entry point into the cluster
and these requests have to be either in
yaml format or json format and this is
how example configuration in yaml format
actually looks like so with this we are
sending a request to kubernetes to
configure a component called deployment
which is basically a template or a
blueprint for creating pods and in this
specific configuration example we tell
kubernetes to create two replica pods
for us called my app with each pod
replica having a container based on my
image running inside in addition to that
we
configure what the environment variables
and the port configuration of this
container inside of the pod should be
and as you see
the
configuration requests in kubernetes are
declarative form so we declare what is
our desired outcome from kubernetes
and kubernetes tries to meet those
requirements meaning for example since
we declare we want two replica parts of
my app deployment to be running in the
cluster and one of those parts dies the
controller manager will see that the
ease and shoot states now are different
the actual state is one part our desired
state is 2 so it goes to work to make
sure that this desired state is
recovered automatically restarting the
second replica of that pod
so here i have examples of a deployment
and service configuration files side by
side so the first thing is that every
configuration file in kubernetes has
three parts the first part is where the
metadata of that component that you're
creating resides and one of the metadata
is obviously name of the component
itself the second part in the
configuration file is specification so
each component's configuration file will
have a specification where you basically
put every kind of configuration that you
want to apply for that
component the first two lines here as
you see is just
declaring what you want to create here
we are creating deployment and here
we're creating a service
and this is basically you have to look
up for each component there's a
different api version
so now inside of the specification part
obviously the attributes will be
specific to the kind of a component that
you're creating so deployment will have
its own attributes
that only apply for deployment and the
service will have its own stuff but i
said there are three parts of a
configuration file and
we just see metadata and the
specification so where's the third part
so the third part will be a status but
it's going to be automatically generated
and edit by kubernetes so the way it
works is that kubernetes will always
compare what is the desired state and
what is the actual state or the status
of that component and if the status and
desired state do not match then
kubernetes knows there's something to be
fixed there so it's gonna try to fix it
and this is the basis of the
self-healing feature that kubernetes
provides for example here you specify
you want two replicas of nginx
deployment so when you apply this when
you actually create the deployment using
this configuration file that's what
apply means kubernetes will add here the
status of your deployment and it will
update that state continuously so for
example if a status at some point will
say just one replica is running then
kubernetes will compare that status with
the specification and we'll know there
is a problem there another replica needs
to be created sap now another
interesting question here is
where does kubernetes actually get the
status data to automatically add here or
update continuously that information
comes from the icd remember the cluster
brain one of the master processes that
actually stores the cluster data so it
cd holds at any time the current status
of any kubernetes component and that's
where the status information comes from
so as you see the format of the
configuration files is yemel
that's why the extension here and
generally it's pretty straightforward to
understand it's a very simple format but
yaml is very strict about the
indentations so for example if you have
something wrongly indented here your
file will be invalid but other than that
it's pretty simple another thing is
where do you actually store those
configuration files a usual practice is
to store them with your code because
since the deployment and service is
going to be applied to your application
it's a good practice to store these
configuration files in your application
code so usually it will be part of the
whole infrastructure as a code concept
or you can also have its own git
repository just for the configuration
files
so in this video i'm going to show you
what mini cube and cube ctl are and how
to set them up
so first of all let's see what is mini
cube usually in kubernetes world when
you are setting up a production cluster
it will look something like this so you
would have multiple masters at least two
in a production setting and you would
have multiple worker nodes
and master nodes and the worker nodes
have their own separate responsibility
so as you see on the diagram you would
have actual separate virtual or physical
machines that each represent a note
now if you want to test something on
your local environment or if you want to
try something out very quickly for
example deploying new application or new
components and you want to test it on
your local machine obviously setting up
a cluster like this will be pretty
difficult or maybe even impossible if
you don't have enough resources like
memory and cpu etc and exactly for the
use case
there's this open source tool that is
called a mini cube so what a mini cube
is is basically one node cluster where
the master processes and the worker
processes both run on one node and this
node will have a docker container
runtime pre-installed so you will be
able to run the containers or the pods
with containers on this node
so now that you have this virtual node
on your local machine that represents
mini cube you need some way to interact
with that cluster so you need a way to
create pods
and other kubernetes components on the
node and the way to do it is using
cubectl which is a command line tool for
kubernetes cluster so let's see how it
actually works remember we said that
minicube runs both master and work
processes so one of the master processes
called api server is actually the main
entry point into the kubernetes cluster
so if you want to do anything in the
kubernetes if you want to configure
anything create any component you first
have to talk to the api server and the
way to talk to the api server is through
different clients so you can have a ui
like a dashboard you can talk to it
using kubernetes api
or a command line tool which is cubectl
and cubectl is actually the most
powerful of all the three clients
because with cube cdl you can basically
do
anything in the kubernetes that you want
and throughout this video tutorials
we're going to be using cube ctl mostly
so once the cube ctl submits commands to
the api server to create components
delete components etc the work processes
on minicube node will actually make it
happen so they will be actually
executing the commands to create the
parts to destroy the parts to create
services etc so this is the mini cube
setup and this is how cubectl is used to
interact with the cluster an important
thing to note here is that kipctl isn't
just for minikube cluster if you have a
cloud cluster or a hybrid cluster
whatever cube ctl is the tool to use to
interact with any type of kubernetes
cluster setup so that's important to
note here so now that we know what mini
cube and cube ctl are let's actually
install them to see them in practice
now let's see how to install and run
mini cube there are many different ways
depending on your operating system and
its architecture so the best way is to
reference the official documentation and
here as you see minicube can run either
as a container or a virtual machine and
these are the resource requirements to
run minicube on your machine so make
sure you have enough resources for
installation you just select the correct
data for your machine in my case it's
going to be mac os with a home homebrew
installation
and with one simple brew installed mini
cube command i can basically install
mini cube
like this and as you see the latest mini
cube version has been installed once
minicube is installed we want to
actually start or create a mini cube
cluster
which is also super easy as you see
we simply execute a mini cube start
command
however as i mentioned
minicube must start either as a
container or a virtual machine so we
need either a container or a virtual
machine tool installed on our laptop to
run mini cube and this is going to be
the driver for mini cube and opening the
drivers page
you see the list of supported drivers
for linux mac os and windows and you see
that docker is actually the preferred
driver for running mini cube on all
operating systems now this may be a
little bit confusing because as you know
inside the kubernetes cluster we run
docker containers and it's important to
note here that mini cube insulation
actually comes with docker already
installed to run those containers but
docker as a driver from minicube means
that we are hosting minicube on our
local machine as a docker container
itself so we have two layers of docker
mini cube running is a docker container
and inside mini cube we have docker
packaged in minikube to run our
application containers and for hosting
minicube on our machine we can use
docker so if you have docker already
installed on your machine you're all set
up to start a mini cube cluster
if not also not a problem you can easily
install it from here
so clicking on install docker link this
will take me to docker hub where i have
docker desktop installation for windows
and mac
so i'm simply going to click in
in my case docker desktop for mac and
i'm gonna download and install docker
and once downloaded just install it
drag and drop into the applications
folder
and now we can start the docker daemon
from the applications
and as you see docker is starting up so
the download and installation may take
some time but once docker is installed
and running we can switch back to the
terminal and start the mini cube cluster
using mini cube
start command passing docker as a driver
option
using the driver flag with docker value
and let's execute
and this may also take a while when
you're running it first time because it
needs to actually create the cluster and
download all the necessary images and
components so the next time you do mini
cube start it should actually go faster
and as you see this command created a
local kubernetes cluster on our machine
with the latest kubernetes version
1.22 and now we can check the status of
the cluster using minicube
status command
and we see that all the components
inside are running and everything is
configured and now start to actually
interact with our cluster using
command line tool and cubectl actually
gets installed as a dependency when we
install minicube
which you see right here installing
dependencies for minicube and kubernetes
cli is actually cube ctl
and that means we already have that
available we don't have to install it so
now i can do cube ctl get node
and this will display all the nodes in
the cluster in our case we just have one
node which is control plane and the
worker node at the same time
and we see information for each node
like the status the kubernetes version
that it's running as well as when it was
added to the cluster so with this we now
have an actual kubernetes cluster
running locally on our machine and we
can start deploying applications in it
so from this point on we are going to be
interacting with the mini cube cluster
using cubectl command line tool so
minicube is basically just for the
startup and for deleting the cluster but
everything else configuring we're going
to be doing through cubectl now we have
enough knowledge to deploy a very simple
but realistic application setup in a
kubernetes cluster we will deploy a
mongodb database and a web application
which will connect to the mongodb
database using external configuration
data from config map and the secret and
finally we will make our web application
accessible externally from the browser
so let's get right in so i have two
resources here we're going to reference
the kubernetes documentation to create
our components which is a realistic way
of working with kubernetes and also a
docker hub where i have
the web application image that i created
which is publicly accessible so you can
also pull it directly from the docker
hub in your kubernetes cluster so first
let's go ahead and create
all the kubernetes configuration files
that we need for deploying our
application setup and for that i'm going
to go to visual studio code where i have
a kubernetes demo folder open and in
this folder we're going to create four
kubernetes configuration files that we
need we're going to create a config map
with mongodb
database endpoint we're going to create
a secret with username and password for
mongodb and then we're going to create a
configuration file for deploying a
mongodb application
and its service and then we're going to
create kubernetes configuration file for
deploying our simple demo app
application with its service
so the first file will be called
config.yml
and creating a config map in kubernetes
is super simple for the syntax we can
reference kubernetes documentation
so i'm going to copy the first part here
paste it in
and that's basically the main syntax
we're starting from
let's call our config map
config
so we have the metadata and then we have
the actual
contents of this config map within the
data attribute we have all the key value
pairs that we define as external
configuration within this config map in
our case we just have one which we're
going to call
url as a key and of course we need a
value for the mongodb url and the value
will be the service that we're going to
create for mongodb application and we're
going to call that service
service
and in a couple of minutes you're going
to see how to create this service
and that will be basically all the
configuration we need for creating
config map
so that one is done let's now go ahead
and create secret
dot
yaml which will hold the username and
password for mongodb application again
to reference
documentation
i'm going to take this one and let's
actually copy the whole thing
so we have the secret kind instead of
config map let's call this secret
we have type opaque which is the generic
type for defining secret data basically
and we have the same data attribute here
and let's actually create our own values
let's call this
[Music]
user
and
password
and as you already learned the values in
secret are base64 encoded so we can just
set the values plain text we have to
encode them first and encoding values is
super easy we're just gonna do echo
and let's call it user
and
base 64. encode it
and the same way let's do
password
and
paste those values
and this will be our secret
configuration and now when we create
deployments for our applications we can
reference
any of the values defined in the secret
or config map so let's see how that
works
again let's create a new file and let's
call this dot yaml this is going
to be a configuration file where
we're going to create deployment and
service for mongodb you can have
separate files for them but it's a very
common thing to put them together
because all the deployments need
services so you have them grouped in one
yaml file
and again
let's reference the documentation for
the deployment example syntax
and we can then adjust the values as we
need
and as you see deployment configuration
file looks a little bit more complex
than configmap or a secret so let's go
through the configuration and understand
all these attributes so we have the
metadata section
and the specification and these are
basically deployment specific
configuration that we have in the
specification section and let's start
with the main part of the deployment
which defines the blueprint for the pots
and that blueprint is defined as a
template so template
basically is a configuration of the part
within the configuration of deployment
and you see that template section has
its own metadata and own spec or
specification just like deployment has
its metadata and specification right so
this part actually configures the pod
within a deployment and in the
specification of the pod we have the
definition of containers so this is a
list of containers as you learned you
can have multiple containers in a pot
but mostly one main application per pot
and this is where we define which image
will be used to create this pod in our
case this is going to be a mongodb image
and if we
search for
in docker hub
that's basically the image name and you
can find all the text
in the text section and we're going to
use the tag 5.0
so one go
5.0 that's where we define the image
of the container within the pot we can
name this
mongodb this is just the name of the
container and we also have the port
where the container will listen and
let's check our image and as you see
mongodb starts at this port so we can
just copy it and paste it in here so
this basically
just configures our deployment to create
pods with a mongodb image version
5.0 so that's the core of a deployment
now let's see what is all this other
stuff here first of all we have this
labels attribute in the metadata section
and then we also have match labels
attribute so what is this about in
kubernetes you can give any component
a key value pair labels so you can label
anything from pod to deployment to
configmap etc and labels basically are
additional identifiers of the components
in addition to the name for example
so you can
identify and address specific components
using their labels
now why do we need them first of all
when we have multiple replicas of the
same part
each part will get a unique
name however
they can share the same label so we can
identify all the part replicas of the
same application using a specific label
that all of them share and that's why in
the metadata of the pod we always have
this label so for pods labels is a
required field for other components like
deployment configmap etc labels is
optional but it is a good practice to
set them
now
when we create pod replicas how does
deployment know which parts actually
belong to it or how does kubernetes know
which pods belong to which deployments
and that is defined using
this part right here so
selector match labels is in the
specification of the deployment as you
see and this defines
that all the parts that match
this label belong to
this deployment so that's why we have
match labels here
so this
selector will match the pods created
with this configuration
because they have label app engine x now
are these labels
given or can you select any key value
pairs well these are totally up to you
you can call it whatever you want
you can call it my key
my value it doesn't really matter
however the standard and a common
practice in kubernetes is to use app
key in the labels when labeling your
applications and the value will
obviously be whatever application you
have so let's actually change and set
the values
to instead of nginx
because that's our application and of
course we want to match label app
and let's also change
this one right here
to deployment and finally last
attribute we have here is replicas which
is super simple and straightforward this
just defines how many pods you want to
create using this blueprint in our case
let's do just one replica because it's a
database and as you learned if you want
to scale databases in kubernetes you
should use stateful set and not a
deployment to keep everything simple
we're going to stick to one replica and
that basically configures our mongodb
deployment
and the pod blueprint now let's add a
service configuration because every
application needs a service in
kubernetes and
that's going to be a separate
yaml
unit or yaml section and we're going to
separate it using
three dashes which is basic yaml syntax
nothing specific to kubernetes and again
let's
grab a service example
and adjust it as we need now service
configuration is much easier than the
deployment as you see first let's change
the name let's call it service and
remember this is the end point
which
we will use to access and that's
what we defined right here so this is
the name of the service
and in the specification we have
service specific attributes first of all
we have the selector attribute which you
already know from here now why do we
need a selector in service because as
you know service needs to forward the
request that it gets to
its endpoint pods how does service know
which pods belong to it and which ones
it should forward the requests to well
using the same label selector as we saw
on deployment so this should match
the label
of the pods that will belong to the
service which is
and that's how service and pods
will find each other and then we have
the ports configuration which is also
super simple service is accessible
within the cluster using its own ip
address and the port and we define its
port right here
and this can be any port that we decide
on this could be 80 8080 doesn't really
matter
and we have the target port which is the
port of the pods that belong to the
service and logically enough the target
port should always be the same as the
container port because that's where the
application in the pod is accessible
that's where the service should forward
the request to so again very important
port attribute sets the port of the
service and target port tells service
to which port it should forward the
request to the pods and this should be
same as the container port port and
target port values can be different or
again it's a common standard
to
select the same port for the service as
well just to keep things simple so let's
save this and that's our configuration
for mongodb deployment and service
now i'm going to copy this whole thing
and
create
a deployment in service for web
application for our kubernetes demo
application and let's call this webapp
dot yaml
paste
everything in
and we can just adjust all these
values
in the service
and deployment
all the labels and label selectors of
course
and right here we of course need the
correct image of our web application
going back to our docker hub
this is
the name of my image and again this is
publicly accessible so you can use it as
well
and
the tag is v
1.0
and there you go so this is a very
simple node.js application which starts
on port 3000 so that's why we need to
define container port on 3000 and
container port is same as target port
on the service and we can set the
service port to the same value and this
will configure
deployment
and
service for our web application
so this is
the basic configuration for deployment
and service for any application in
kubernetes cluster
but we have one more thing to configure
in our deployment components for both
and web app which is we need to
pass the data defined in the config and
secret components
first of all when starting a mongodb
application we need to set user name and
password so when mongodb application
starts it will automatically generate
username and password for mongodb and we
can then use that to access it in our
cluster
now how do we know
how username and password can be
configured in a mongodb on startup well
we go to the image documentation and
right here we see the environment
variable names
for username and password and these are
actually required fields in most of the
databases we have to set them otherwise
we won't be able to access them so the
next question is how do we configure
environment variables in a container
configuration so how do we pass
environment variables to this
application running inside the container
well that's also very easy we have n
attribute for that
which is a list of environment variables
with names
and
values that's it
so
very simple so name is the environment
variable name and value is
the environment variable value so let's
copy the name
so this is the environment variable name
that mongodb expects and we have to set
a value whatever we want the username to
be now we can directly set
the username right here like this
or in our case we're going to reference
them from secret and config
components
how do we do that also pretty simple we
do value from
and we want to reference it
from the secret so we do secret
key
ref
and under that we have the name of the
secret
which we called secret
and the key
which is user
so kubernetes will basically find a
secret with this name
and get the value set for this key and
substitute it as a value for this
environment variable and the same way
we're gonna
configure
a password
so let's take the password that's the
name of the environment variable
same secrets
component
this time with a different key
and that's it
so our mongodb configuration file is
complete
and when it starts a user with these
credentials will be created
when our web application starts it will
need to connect to the database so we
need to give this web application
information about the database endpoint
where can it access the database
and which username and password to use
to authenticate with the database and i
have already configured this application
inside to expect all these values as
environment variables with specific
names so we're going to pass
these three pieces of data as
environment variables
to the web app application so let's do
that
again
the name of the environment variable the
first one i actually called username
and we can actually copy
the same configuration and paste it here
and you already see an advantage of
using
configuration from secret or config
because if you need the same information
in 10 different applications you create
it once and reference it 10 times
the second
environment variable is for password
and i called this one user pwd
and finally our application needs
the database endpoint which
will be db url
and this value is not in the secret
but in configmap and how do we access
value from config map very similar as
the secret so we have the same value
from
and instead of secret key ref we have
config
map
kirev
or key reference
and then we have
name which we called config
and key
which is the name of the key
and that's it so we don't have any of
the configuration values hard coded in
our
kubernetes configuration files we only
have references which makes our
configuration way cleaner so if
something changes or the values change
here we don't have to adjust anything in
our deployments
so connectivity with the database is
configured and there is one last thing
missing in our web application
configuration before we deploy all this
which is making it accessible from the
browser we want to be able to type in
some url and access our web application
from the browser right and as you
learned we have external services for
that so we will need to adjust
the service configuration a little bit
right now
these service configurations both of
them are internal services
so to make it external
all we need to do is
set a type which is by default cluster
ip
so that's the default type if we don't
specify the type but we're going to set
it to
node port
so node port is an external service type
and it requires a third port which is
called
a node port
so what is a node port port
this is a port which will open on the
kubernetes nodes on which the
application will be accessible so on the
node ip address in node port combination
we will be able to access
this service which will then access
the pods behind it and node port range
is actually defined in kubernetes so we
can't just type anything we want here
like this it has to be within the range
of thirty thousand and thirty two
thousand seven hundred sixty seven so
anything within this range is fine as a
value so we can do 30 000 or 30
100 doesn't really matter
so let's set this as a value and this
completes the web app configuration file
now we have a very simple but also
pretty realistic
configuration
for deploying an application with its
database
with external configuration in the
cluster so as a final step we're just
gonna create all these components one by
one in kubernetes so i'm gonna open a
terminal and we already have a mini cube
cluster running
but there are no components inside so
first we need to create the external
configurations because
they need to be there when we create
mongodb and web application deployments
because they reference those
configurations so let's create
config and secret first to do that
we have cube ctl apply command with
minus f which stands for file which
takes a kubernetes configuration file as
an input
like this
and creates whatever is defined inside
and as you see config was created
now let's create longer secret
next we're gonna create a database
because our web application depends on
it
so it should start first
and again let's do cube ctl apply
with mongo.yaml as an input and as you
see deployment
and service were created and finally
let's deploy our web application and
there you go so everything seems fine
but of course we want to check all the
parts and all the components
that were created in the cluster
so for that i'm going to actually switch
to command line so that we can see it
better
and first we're going to do cube ctl get
all
which gives you all the components
created in the cluster which includes
deployments
the pods
behind the deployment and all the
services and as you see we have
deployment and web app deployment parts
each one with one replica running and we
have the services for
mongodb and web app
and web app service is of node port type
which means we can access it externally
however we don't see configmap and
secret here we can get them using
kubectl get config map
and cubectl get
secret commands so as you see displaying
any component is pretty easy using cube
ctl you just do kubectl get and the name
of the component like pod and you get
a list of those components
with some additional data
and cubesatl is actually a very powerful
tool and it has a bunch of sub-commands
so as a natural documentation for
cubectl to basically have an overview
and see what you can do with it you can
always use cubectl
help as a documentation which lists all
the sub-commands you can use with it one
of them which we already used
get and for each sub-command
like cube ctl get you can also get some
help
and basically see all the examples
plus all the available options so you
can navigate all the options you have
here so cube ctl get is obviously the
most common command you're going to use
to list all the components
if you want to see more details about a
certain component
you can use cube ctl describe command
for it a name of the component like a
service for example
and the actual instance of that
component like web app service and this
will give you more detailed output about
that specific component same way you can
also do cube ctl describe pod and then
name of the pod
like this one
and this will give you details about
your pot including the status of how the
pod was scheduled
the container configuration
labels etc
and finally
of course when you have applications
running in your cluster you want to
check the logs to troubleshoot debug or
just make sure that everything is fine
within the pod and you can do that very
easily using kubectl locks command
and just specifying name of the pot like
this
this gives you
logs of the container inside
and you can even stream the logs using
minus f option
so the final step we want to validate
that our application is also accessible
from the browser and for that we
actually configured the service and we
can actually get the service using
service or svc
comment so how do we access this service
from the browser because this is the
port we're going to use to access it but
which ip address is it accessible at
well the node port service is always
accessible at the ip address of the
cluster node so all the work nodes that
the cluster has in our case we just have
one which is the mini cube so we need
the ip address of the mini cube to get
that
we just do mini cube ip
or using kubernetes we can also get
get node which gives you mini cube
and
a white output
or a longer output than what you see
here
which will give you
the ip address
of the node which is the same as this
one right here and by the way you can
use the all white option for any other
get command for services pods etc to get
some additional information like this
so let's grab the mini cube ip address
and access the application at this port
which is 30
and there you go this is our web
application which is connected to
mongodb and we can also validate that by
editing something
and saving because this request goes to
database
and if we refresh
the changes should still be there
awesome so we deployed an application
with its database in kubernetes which is
a blueprint configuration for most
common application
setups you're gonna have plus you also
learn a couple of cubesitl commands as
well as how to reference the kubernetes
official documentation to help you
configure and create all the components
i hope i helped you learn a lot about
kubernetes with this crash course and
you feel much more confident with
kubernetes now if you're serious about
learning kubernetes in depth i actually
have two more resources for you
as i mentioned at the beginning if you
want to really become an expert in
kubernetes and learn how to build and
administer a cluster from scratch then
my complete kubernetes administrator
course will be a perfect resource for
you but if your goal is rather to become
a devops engineer then our complete
devops educational program will be the
best fit for you where during a
six-month program you learn all the
necessary concepts and technologies
including kubernetes which you need to
get started in devops or cloud
engineering
if you're interested you can find the
links in the video description below and
with that
thank you for watching and see you in
the next video